README.md, before:

# Simpletuner
Tool for running Combined Elimination against custom projects.

## Quickstart
Simpletuner comes pre-prepared with two example projects to optimize:

 - A simple example project (invoked with `--context ExampleWorkerContext`)
 - The ChipsAlliance SweRV EH1 verilated core (`--context SweRVWorkerContext`)

### Running Simpletuner on native machine
Running Simpletuner is a two-step process:
#### 1) Generate the flags file the Combined Elimination will use:
```
$ ./gen-flags.py --base-opt O2 --cc $(which gcc) > config/my-flag-set.json
```
 - `--base-opt O2`: Use the `-O2` optimisation flag as the "base" for the configuration.
 - `--cc`: The C compiler to use.

#### 2) Run Simpletuner, optimising the example project for size using the above flags:
```
$ ./simpletuner.py --context ExampleWorkerContext --benchmark size --config config/riscv.O2.json --cc $(which gcc) -j $(nproc)
```
 - `--context ExampleWorkerContext`: use the `ExampleWorkerContext` class implemented in `context/ExampleWorkerContext.py`.
 - `--benchmark size`: Optimise the flags for the `size` benchmark, the implementation of which is provided by the `ExampleWorkerClass` class. Note that this parameter will be specific to each context class, and context classes provide simpletuner with information of what benchmarks they support.
 - `--config flags/riscv.O2.json`: Use the provided configuration as the starting point for optimisation. `config/riscv.O2.json` is provided as part of this repository, however you can generate your own configuration if you wish.
 - `--cc`: The C compiler to use. Note that its the reponsibility of the context class to actually play nice and use this parameter. Nothing is stopping you from calling your own arbitrary C compiler from within the context class `compile()` method hook, but you should honour this parameter if you can.
 - `-j`: Number of threads to start. More = Better.

This will start a lengthy Combined Elimination run for the `ExampleWorkerContext` (with a very noisy log output) across `nproc` threads for the native system compiler.

#### Live output viewing

To view the live output, look into the `workspace/` directory (which should be created when running `simpletuner` for the first time), and look into the latest directory. Every time you run `./simpletuner`, the script will generate a timestamped directory under the `workspace/` directory which will contain all the data and output for the current invocation.
Typically it might look something like this:
```commandline
simpletuner/workspace/20220204-150006-QfaH$ ls
0  7                        iteration.13  iteration.2   iteration.7
1  global_leaderboard.live  iteration.14  iteration.20  iteration.8
2  iteration.0              iteration.15  iteration.21  iteration.9
3  iteration.1              iteration.16  iteration.3   log.txt
4  iteration.10             iteration.17  iteration.4
5  iteration.11             iteration.18  iteration.5
6  iteration.12             iteration.19  iteration.6
```

 - `iteration.N`: These files are iterations of the combined elimination process.
 - `global_leaderboard.live`: This file is updated live during the process, letting you inspect what the current best set of flags are.
 - `0/`, `1/`, ..., `n/`: These are worker context directories, where the worker context actually runs the benchmark.
 - `log.txt`: Huge log with all of the combined elimination process output
 
### SweRV
Running the ChipsAlliance SweRV EH1 core is a bit more involved. the `eh1/` directory contains a `Makefile` which does the following:
1) Fetch `verilator` source from GitHub
2) Builds `verilator` and installs into the same directory
3) Fetch the `SweRV` source from GitHub
4) Build the `SweRV` core from source
5) Package the whole directory into a `eh1.tar.gz`

By running `$ make all` in the `eh1/` directory, the Makefile should do the above and finally generate the file `eh1.tar.gz`.

You won't have to generate the flags file for this project - you can just use the `config/riscv.O2.json` flag set.

Make sure that you have a `riscv32-unknown-elf-gcc` compiler in your path, (you can download an upstream `riscv32` compiler from [here](https://www.embecosm.com/resources/tool-chain-downloads/#riscv-stable)), and invoke the `simpletuner` script as follows:
```commandline
SWERV_SOURCE_TAR=$(realpath eh1/eh1.tar.gz) ./simpletuner.py -j 8 --context SweRVWorkerContext --benchmark execute --config config/riscv.O2.json --cc [path to riscv32-unknown-elf-gcc]
```

## Creating custom worker contexts

A "Worker context" is simply a class within the `context/` that implements certain methods required by the Simpletuner driver.

Simpletuner comes pre-included with two worker contexts:
```commandline
context
├── ExampleWorkerContext.py
└── SweRVWorkerContext.py
```

The `ExampleWorkerContext.py` file provides a very simple worker context that shows how to implement the callbacks neccesary for Simpletuner to function. Below is a brief summary of the class methods that you'll need to implement, and when Simpletuner will call them.

```python
class MyWorkerContext:
    # Return the "type" of benchmark your Worker supports.
    # This information will be used by the Simpletuner driver
    # to check the user-supplied --benchmark flag.
    @staticmethod
    def get_available_benchmark_types() -> list:
        return ["execution", "size"];

    # Simpletuner will call this function when it first instantiates the class.
    # `idx` is the numeric index of the current thread,
    # `workspace` is the absolute path to a workspace created for the class,
    # `cc` contains the absolute path to the C compiler,
    # `benchmark_type` contains the user-provided `--benchmark` argument. This
    #      is useful when you want to run either for size, execution speed, or
    #      anything else.
    def __init__(self, idx, workspace, cc, benchmark_type):

    # Initialise workspace, whatever that may be.
    # Simpletuner will call this function after it has created your directory and called
    # your `__init__` function. The `workspace` parameter provided earlier in
    # `__init__` is intended to be used here.
    def init_workspace(self):

    # Simpletuner will call this function to compare scores.
    # Return `True` if score `x` is "better" than score `y`.
    def better(self, x, y) -> float:

    # Simpletuner will call this function when your `benchmark` or `compile` step fails
    # for any reason. You want to return numerically the worst possible score, usually "ininity".
    def worst_possible_result(self) -> float:
        return float('inf');

    # Simpletuner will call this function right before it calls your `benchmark` function.
    def compile(self, flags) -> CompileResult:

    # Simpletuner will call this to run your benchmark.
    def benchmark(self):
```

Commit message:

Update all licensing for OpenChain compliance
	This clarifies the licensing terms for code and documentation

	* LICENSE.CCBYSA: Created.
	* LICENSE.GPL3: Created.
	* README.md: Add licensing header.
	* common.py: Likewise.
	* compilerresult.py: Deleted.
	* context/ExampleWorkerContext.py: Add licensing header.
	* context/NewlibWorkerContext.py: Likewise.
	* context/SweRVWorkerContext.py: Likewise.
	* eh1/Makefile: Likewise.
	* flag.py: Likewise.
	* gcc.py: Likewise.
	* gen-flags.py: Likewise.
	* minimize-flags.py: Likewise.
	* newlib-cygwin/Makefile: Likewise.
	* show-global-leaderboard.py: Likewise.
	* simpletuner.py: Likewise.

Signed-off-by: Jeremy Bennett <jeremy.bennett@embecosm.com>

README.md, after:

<!---

README for SimpleTuner

Copyright (C) 2021-2023 Embecosm <www.embecosm.com>
Contributor Maxim Blinov <maxim.blinov@embecosm.com>

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0

--->

# Simpletuner
Tool for running Combined Elimination against custom projects. The tool was originally created by Maxim Blinov of Embecosm.

The project is made freely available under the GPL 3.0 license (for code), and the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International license (for documentation).

## Quickstart
Simpletuner comes pre-prepared with two example projects to optimize:

 - A simple example project (invoked with `--context ExampleWorkerContext`)
 - The ChipsAlliance SweRV EH1 verilated core (`--context SweRVWorkerContext`)

### Running Simpletuner on native machine
Running Simpletuner is a two-step process:
#### 1) Generate the flags file the Combined Elimination will use:
```
$ ./gen-flags.py --base-opt O2 --cc $(which gcc) > config/my-flag-set.json
```
 - `--base-opt O2`: Use the `-O2` optimisation flag as the "base" for the configuration.
 - `--cc`: The C compiler to use.

#### 2) Run Simpletuner, optimising the example project for size using the above flags:
```
$ ./simpletuner.py --context ExampleWorkerContext --benchmark size --config config/riscv.O2.json --cc $(which gcc) -j $(nproc)
```
 - `--context ExampleWorkerContext`: use the `ExampleWorkerContext` class implemented in `context/ExampleWorkerContext.py`.
 - `--benchmark size`: Optimise the flags for the `size` benchmark, the implementation of which is provided by the `ExampleWorkerClass` class. Note that this parameter will be specific to each context class, and context classes provide simpletuner with information of what benchmarks they support.
 - `--config flags/riscv.O2.json`: Use the provided configuration as the starting point for optimisation. `config/riscv.O2.json` is provided as part of this repository, however you can generate your own configuration if you wish.
 - `--cc`: The C compiler to use. Note that its the reponsibility of the context class to actually play nice and use this parameter. Nothing is stopping you from calling your own arbitrary C compiler from within the context class `compile()` method hook, but you should honour this parameter if you can.
 - `-j`: Number of threads to start. More = Better.

This will start a lengthy Combined Elimination run for the `ExampleWorkerContext` (with a very noisy log output) across `nproc` threads for the native system compiler.

#### Live output viewing

To view the live output, look into the `workspace/` directory (which should be created when running `simpletuner` for the first time), and look into the latest directory. Every time you run `./simpletuner`, the script will generate a timestamped directory under the `workspace/` directory which will contain all the data and output for the current invocation.
Typically it might look something like this:
```commandline
simpletuner/workspace/20220204-150006-QfaH$ ls
0  7                        iteration.13  iteration.2   iteration.7
1  global_leaderboard.live  iteration.14  iteration.20  iteration.8
2  iteration.0              iteration.15  iteration.21  iteration.9
3  iteration.1              iteration.16  iteration.3   log.txt
4  iteration.10             iteration.17  iteration.4
5  iteration.11             iteration.18  iteration.5
6  iteration.12             iteration.19  iteration.6
```

 - `iteration.N`: These files are iterations of the combined elimination process.
 - `global_leaderboard.live`: This file is updated live during the process, letting you inspect what the current best set of flags are.
 - `0/`, `1/`, ..., `n/`: These are worker context directories, where the worker context actually runs the benchmark.
 - `log.txt`: Huge log with all of the combined elimination process output
 
### SweRV
Running the ChipsAlliance SweRV EH1 core is a bit more involved. the `eh1/` directory contains a `Makefile` which does the following:
1) Fetch `verilator` source from GitHub
2) Builds `verilator` and installs into the same directory
3) Fetch the `SweRV` source from GitHub
4) Build the `SweRV` core from source
5) Package the whole directory into a `eh1.tar.gz`

By running `$ make all` in the `eh1/` directory, the Makefile should do the above and finally generate the file `eh1.tar.gz`.

You won't have to generate the flags file for this project - you can just use the `config/riscv.O2.json` flag set.

Make sure that you have a `riscv32-unknown-elf-gcc` compiler in your path, (you can download an upstream `riscv32` compiler from [here](https://www.embecosm.com/resources/tool-chain-downloads/#riscv-stable)), and invoke the `simpletuner` script as follows:
```commandline
SWERV_SOURCE_TAR=$(realpath eh1/eh1.tar.gz) ./simpletuner.py -j 8 --context SweRVWorkerContext --benchmark execute --config config/riscv.O2.json --cc [path to riscv32-unknown-elf-gcc]
```

## Creating custom worker contexts

A "Worker context" is simply a class within the `context/` that implements certain methods required by the Simpletuner driver.

Simpletuner comes pre-included with two worker contexts:
```commandline
context
├── ExampleWorkerContext.py
└── SweRVWorkerContext.py
```

The `ExampleWorkerContext.py` file provides a very simple worker context that shows how to implement the callbacks neccesary for Simpletuner to function. Below is a brief summary of the class methods that you'll need to implement, and when Simpletuner will call them.

```python
class MyWorkerContext:
    # Return the "type" of benchmark your Worker supports.
    # This information will be used by the Simpletuner driver
    # to check the user-supplied --benchmark flag.
    @staticmethod
    def get_available_benchmark_types() -> list:
        return ["execution", "size"];

    # Simpletuner will call this function when it first instantiates the class.
    # `idx` is the numeric index of the current thread,
    # `workspace` is the absolute path to a workspace created for the class,
    # `cc` contains the absolute path to the C compiler,
    # `benchmark_type` contains the user-provided `--benchmark` argument. This
    #      is useful when you want to run either for size, execution speed, or
    #      anything else.
    def __init__(self, idx, workspace, cc, benchmark_type):

    # Initialise workspace, whatever that may be.
    # Simpletuner will call this function after it has created your directory and called
    # your `__init__` function. The `workspace` parameter provided earlier in
    # `__init__` is intended to be used here.
    def init_workspace(self):

    # Simpletuner will call this function to compare scores.
    # Return `True` if score `x` is "better" than score `y`.
    def better(self, x, y) -> float:

    # Simpletuner will call this function when your `benchmark` or `compile` step fails
    # for any reason. You want to return numerically the worst possible score, usually "ininity".
    def worst_possible_result(self) -> float:
        return float('inf');

    # Simpletuner will call this function right before it calls your `benchmark` function.
    def compile(self, flags) -> CompileResult:

    # Simpletuner will call this to run your benchmark.
    def benchmark(self):
```
